docs/keys.rst, before:

.. _keys-chapter:

==============
Ratelimit Keys
==============

The ``key=`` argument to the decorator takes either a string or a
callable.


.. _keys-common:

Common keys
===========

The following string values for ``key=`` provide shortcuts to commonly
used ratelimit keys:

- ``'ip'`` - Use the request IP address (i.e.
  ``request.META['REMOTE_ADDR']``)

    .. note::
       If you are using a reverse proxy, make sure this value is correct
       or use an appropriate ``header:`` value. See the :ref:`security
       <security-chapter>` notes.
- ``'get:X'`` - Use the value of ``request.GET.get('X', '')``.
- ``'post:X'`` - Use the value of ``request.POST.get('X', '')``.
- ``'header:x-x'`` - Use the value of
  ``request.META.get('HTTP_X_X', '')``.

    .. note::
       The value right of the colon will be translated to all-caps and
       any dashes will be replaced with underscores, e.g.: x-client-ip
       => X_CLIENT_IP.
- ``'user'`` - Use an appropriate value from ``request.user``. Do not use
  with unauthenticated users.
- ``'user_or_ip'`` - Use an appropriate value from ``request.user`` if
  the user is authenticated, otherwise use
  ``request.META['REMOTE_ADDR']`` (see the note above about reverse
  proxies).

.. note::

    Missing headers, GET, and POST values will all be treated as empty
    strings, and ratelimited in the same bucket.

.. warning::

    Using user-supplied data, like data from GET and POST or headers
    directly from the User-Agent can allow users to trivially opt out of
    ratelimiting. See the note in :ref:`the security chapter
    <security-user-supplied>`.


.. _keys-strings:

String values
=============

Other string values not from the list above will be treated as the
dotted Python path to a callable. See :ref:`below <keys-callable>` for
more on callables.


.. _keys-callable:

Callable values
===============

.. versionadded:: 0.3
.. versionchanged:: 0.5
   Added support for python path to callables.
.. versionchanged:: 0.6
   Callable was mistakenly only passed the ``request``, now also gets ``group`` as documented.

If the value of ``key=`` is a callable, or the path to a callable, that
callable will be called with two arguments, the :ref:`group
<usage-chapter>` and the ``request`` object. It should return a
bytestring or unicode object, e.g.::

    def my_key(group, request):
        return request.META['REMOTE_ADDR'] + request.user.username

Commit message:

Add support for Django REST framework's

docs/keys.rst, after:

.. _keys-chapter:

==============
Ratelimit Keys
==============

The ``key=`` argument to the decorator takes either a string or a
callable.


.. _keys-common:

Common keys
===========

The following string values for ``key=`` provide shortcuts to commonly
used ratelimit keys:

- ``'ip'`` - Use the request IP address (i.e.
  ``request.META['REMOTE_ADDR']``)

    .. note::
       If you are using a reverse proxy, make sure this value is correct
       or use an appropriate ``header:`` value. See the :ref:`security
       <security-chapter>` notes.
- ``'get:X'`` - Use the value of ``request.GET.get('X', '')``.
- ``'post:X'`` - Use the value of ``request.POST.get('X', '')``.
- ``'data:X'`` - Use the value of ``request.data.get('X', '')`` (useful for projects using Django REST Framework).
- ``'header:x-x'`` - Use the value of
  ``request.META.get('HTTP_X_X', '')``.

    .. note::
       The value right of the colon will be translated to all-caps and
       any dashes will be replaced with underscores, e.g.: x-client-ip
       => X_CLIENT_IP.
- ``'user'`` - Use an appropriate value from ``request.user``. Do not use
  with unauthenticated users.
- ``'user_or_ip'`` - Use an appropriate value from ``request.user`` if
  the user is authenticated, otherwise use
  ``request.META['REMOTE_ADDR']`` (see the note above about reverse
  proxies).

.. note::

    Missing headers, GET, and POST values will all be treated as empty
    strings, and ratelimited in the same bucket.

.. warning::

    Using user-supplied data, like data from GET and POST or headers
    directly from the User-Agent can allow users to trivially opt out of
    ratelimiting. See the note in :ref:`the security chapter
    <security-user-supplied>`.


.. _keys-strings:

String values
=============

Other string values not from the list above will be treated as the
dotted Python path to a callable. See :ref:`below <keys-callable>` for
more on callables.


.. _keys-callable:

Callable values
===============

.. versionadded:: 0.3
.. versionchanged:: 0.5
   Added support for python path to callables.
.. versionchanged:: 0.6
   Callable was mistakenly only passed the ``request``, now also gets ``group`` as documented.

If the value of ``key=`` is a callable, or the path to a callable, that
callable will be called with two arguments, the :ref:`group
<usage-chapter>` and the ``request`` object. It should return a
bytestring or unicode object, e.g.::

    def my_key(group, request):
        return request.META['REMOTE_ADDR'] + request.user.username
